: AL , AR , DC , DE , FL , GA , IL , KY , LA , MD , MO , MS , NC , NJ , OH , PA , SC , TN , TX , VA , WV
Attracts bees, butterflies, and hummingbirds. Ruby-throated hummingbirds and butterflies nectar from the blooms. Members of the genus Monarda support the following specialized bees: Dufourea monardae, Perdita (Perdita) gerhardi, and Protandrena abdominalis.
Attracts bees, butterflies, and hummingbirds. Goldfinches will eat the seeds. Members of the genus Monarda support the following specialized bees: Dufourea monarda, Perdita (Perdita) gerhardi, and Protandrena abdominalis. This plant is resistant to damage by deer and rabbits.
Attracts bees, butterflies, moths, and hummingbirds. Ruby-throated hummingbirds and butterflies nectar from the blooms. Members of the genus Monarda support the following specialized bees: Dufourea monardae, Perdita (Perdita) gerhardi, and Protandrena abdominalis.   This is a host plant for the Gray Marvel Moth, Anterastria teratophora, and the Snout Moth, Pyrausta generosa, P. signatalis.
Blossoms in April and May. Inflorescences racemose, 3-12-flowered, bracteoles membranous, apex acuminate. Flowers: anther filaments without distal pair.
Butterflies and bees are attracted to the nectar in the flowers.  Members of the genus Oenothera support the following specialized bees: Melissodes (Apomelissodes) fimbriatus and Lasioglossum (Sphecodogastra) oenotherae. Seeds attract birds and small mammals.
Butterflies and bumblebees visit the blooms for nectar. Members of the genus Pontederia support the following specialized bee: Florilegus (Florilegus) condignus. Seeds are eaten by ducks. Under the water, the plants provide some shelter for fish. Dragonflies and damselflies lay eggs on the stems.
CAUSES ONLY LOW TOXICITY IF EATEN. SKIN IRRITATION MINOR OR LASTING ONLY FOR A FEW MINUTES. Poisonous by ingestion or dermatitis. [Poisonous parts:  Raw, unripe berries (not poisonous when ripe though still not edible); bark and roots]. Symptoms may include:     Skin irritation from bark and roots; symptoms of ingestion are hypersalivation, vomiting,  and diarrhea. Handling its bark and roots may cause allergic skin reactions.
CAUSES SEVERE PAIN IN THE MOUTH IF EATEN! Poisonous through ingestion. (Poisonous parts: all parts). 

Caution: large quantities may cause trembling, cramps, and staggering as in grazing animals.
Dogs, cats: Vomiting; Horses: liver disease, dermatitis
Dogs: moldy nuts/hulls can cause tremors and seizures, ingestion of shavings can cause incoordination; Horses: laminitis, colic.
EDIBLE PARTS: Small amounts of leaves, flowers, seeds, tubers/roots eaten raw are not dangerous. Leaves, flowers, seeds, tubers/
EDIBLE PARTS: Unfurled fronds HARVEST TIME: Only collect fronds from areas you know have NOT been treated with pesticides. Gather young fiddleheads in the early spring, as soon as they first appear. The fronds tend to get tough and bitter as time progresses. They should still be very tightly curled. SAFE HANDLING PROCEDURES: Soak fronds in warm water to remove dirt and debris. Do not use dish detergent or any type of sanitizer. These products can leave a residue. Remove the brownish, papery scales by rubbing with the hands. Soak for several hours in lightly salted water. Cook for 20 minutes on low heat in a pan filled with about 1/2 inch water. Drain well and serve like greens.
Eastern and central United States: Massachusetts and New York south to Florida, and west to Texas, Kansas, Missouri, and Iowa.
Few fruits are produced pale brown with 1 seed, dry oblong, 5 mm long. Fruit Season of interest: Summer
Flowers are attractive to butterflies, bees and other pollinators. Songbirds eat the seeds. Members of the genus Vernonia support the following specialized bee: Melissodes (Eumelissodes) denticulatus.
Flowers are attractive to butterflies.  Members of the genus Symphyotrichum support the following specialized bees: Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) asteris, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) asteroides, Andrena (Cnemidandrena) hirticincta, Andrena (Cnemidandrena) nubecula, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) placata, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) simplex, and Colletes simulans.
Flowers attract butterflies and bees.  It is a host plant for the Brown Elfin butterfly.  Its fruit attracts songbirds, small mammals, ruffed grouse, wild turkey, black bears and squirrels. Members of the genus Vaccinium support the following specialized bees:Andrena (Conandrena) bradleyi, Andrena (Andrena) carolina, Panurginus atramontensis, Habropoda laboriosa, Colletes productus, Colletes validus, and Osmia (Melanosmia) virga.
Flowers attract butterflies and bees. This plant provides nectar for pollinators and supports Brown Elfin (Callophrys augustinus) larvae which have one flight and appear from May to July in the North and March to April in the South. Adult Brown Elfin butterflies feed on flower nectar. Its fruit attracts small mammals, ruffed grouse, wild turkey, black bears, squirrels, and songbirds, including American Robin, Eastern Bluebird, Scarlet Tanager, Eastern and Spotted Towhees, Gray Catbird, Northern Mockingbird, Brown Thrasher, and Northern Cardinal. The twigs provide food source for deer and rabbits. Members of the genus Vaccinium support the following specialized bees: Andrena (Conandrena) bradleyi, Andrena (Andrena) carolina, Panurginus atramontensis, Habropoda laboriosa, Colletes productus, Colletes validus, and Osmia (Melanosmia) virga.
Flowers attract hummingbirds and bees. Members of the genus Rhododendron support the following specialized bee: Andrena (Andrena) cornelli.
Flowers attract hummingbirds. Members of the genus Rhododendron support the following specialized bee: Andrena (Andrena) cornelli.
Flowers attractive to butterflies and bees. Members of the genus Veronia support the following specialized bee: Melissodes (Eumelissodes) denticulatus.
Flowers provide nectar to pollinators from July until the first frost. This is a larval host plant that supports Silvery Checkerspot (Chlosyne nycteis).  The Silvery Checkerspot has at least 1-2 broods in the north from June-July in the deep south and Texas, they have as many as 3-4 broods from May through September. Songbirds, ruffed grouse, quail, mourning doves, and small mammals are attracted to seeds so leave standing dead flowers into the winter as natural bird feeders. Members of the genus Helianthus support the following specialized bees: Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) accepta, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) aliciae, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) helianthi, Melissodes (Eumelissodes) agilis, Dieunomia (Dieunomia) heteropoda, Megachile (Sayapis) pugnata, and Paranthidium (Paranthidium) jugatorium.
Fruits are attractive to birds and plants provide nesting sites. Chipmunks, White-Tailed Deer, and Cottontail Rabbits also enjoy the fruits. Beavers will eat the branches of the shrub when near water.  Many species of Lepidopteran caterpillars feed on Cornus.  Members of the genus Cornus support the following specialized bees:  Andrena (Gonandrena) fragilis, Andrena (Gonandrena) integra, and Andrena (Gonandrena) platyparia.
Fruits are attractive to birds. Members of the genus Ilex support the following specialized bee: Colletes banksi.
Host plant for the Pearl Crescent (Phyciodes tharos) caterpillars which have several broods and appear from April through November in the north and throughout the year in the deep south and Mexico. Flower nectars are attractive to bees, hover flies,ne and migrating Monarch butterflies. Songbirds and small mammals eat the seeds. Members of the genus Symphyotrichum support the following specialized bees: Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) asteris, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) asteroides, Andrena (Cnemidandrena) hirticincta, Andrena (Cnemidandrena) nubecula, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) placata, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) simplex, and Colletes simulans.
Host plant for the Pearl Crescent butterfly. Flowers are attractive to bees and butterflies. Songbirds and small mammals eat the seeds. Members of the genus Symphyotrichum support the following specialized bees: Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) asteris, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) asteroides, Andrena (Cnemidandrena) hirticincta, Andrena (Cnemidandrena) nubecula, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) placata, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) simplex, and Colletes simulans.
Host plant for the Pearl Crescent butterfly. Flowers are attractive to bees and butterflies. Songbirds and small mammals eat the seeds.  Members of the genus Symphyotrichum support the following specialized bees: Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) asteris, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) asteroides, Andrena (Cnemidandrena) hirticincta, Andrena (Cnemidandrena) nubecula, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) placata, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) simplex, and Colletes simulans.
Hummingbirds nectar at the flowers and songbirds eat the seeds. Members of the genus Oenothera support the following specialized bees: Melissodes (Apomelissodes) fimbriatus and Lasioglossum (Sphecodogastra) oenotherae.
Introduced in the USA: IL;


Maleberry is a nectar plant and produces good tasting honey. Members of the genus Lyonia support the following specialized bees: Colletes productu and Melitta (Cilissa) melittoides.

Mexico and Guatemala; USA:  AL, AR, FL, GA, IL, IN, KY, LA, MD, MO, MS, NC, NJ, OH, OK, PA, SC, TN, TX, and VA.
N. America: AL, GA, FL, LA, NC, SC

Nectar attracts butterflies.  Members of the genus Symphyotrichum support the following specialized bees: Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) asteris, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) asteroides, Andrena (Cnemidandrena) hirticincta, Andrena (Cnemidandrena) nubecula, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) placata, Andrena (Callandrena s.l.) simplex, and Colletes simulans.
Nectar from flowers attracts butterflies, bees and other pollinators.  Songbirds eat the seeds.  Members of the genus Geranium support the following specialized bee: Andrena (Ptilandrena) distans.  Tolerates damage by deer and rabbits.
Nectar from the flowers attracts hummingbirds, butterflies, and bees. Members of the genus Rhododendron support the following specialized bee: Andrena (Andrena) cornelli.
Pairs of wrinkled, lance-shaped, finely toothed leaves are joined together at the base. Perfoliate foliage is quite distinctive: the bases of the pairs of medium green leaves unite to surround the hairy stems (perfoliatum meaning through the foliage). The leaves are up to 8 inches long and 2 inches across, and light or yellowish green. Their bases surround the central stem and merge together (perfoliate). There is a conspicuous network of veins, particularly on the lower leaf surface. This lower surface is also pubescent. Some of the upper leaves near the inflorescence(s) are much smaller in size and sessile.
Poisonous if ingested.     HIGHLY TOXIC, MAY BE FATAL IF EATEN! Symptoms may include     muscle weakness and paralysis, dilated pupils, vomiting, diarrhea, depression, paralysis, and stupor. (Poison parts:     Seeds and tea made from leaves and sprouts)
Que. to B.C., s. to FL, TX & CO. USA: AK, AL, AR, CO, CT, DC, DE, FL, GA, IA, ID, IL, IN, KS, KY, MA, MD, ME, MI, MN, MO, MS, MT, NC, ND, NE, NH, NJ, NM, NY, OH, OK, OR, PA, RI, SC, SD, TN, UT, VA, VT, WA, WI, WV, WY. Canada: AB, BC, MB, NB, NS, NU, ON, PE, QC, SK
SAFE HANDLING PROCEDURE: Wash fruit thoroughly with warm water. Do not use dish detergent or any type of sanitizer. These products can leave a residue. The fruit has a lemon-like flavor and can be used to make jams, jellies, and marmalade.
Said to be somewhat inferior to the other hickories, but is used for the same purposes: tool handles, furniture, interior paneling, and sporting goods. Also used to smoke ham and bacon.
Separate male and female plants, males have shower flowers.  Large 6" to 24" panicle of showy, plume-like clusters of small, creamy-white flowers which rise above the foliage from May to June. The flowers have five oval-shaped petals: the stamens have long, slender filaments.
Stems, leaves, seeds contain cyanide, particularly toxic in the process of wilting: brick red mucous membranes, dilated pupils, difficulty breathing, panting, shock.
Stems, leaves, seeds contain cyanide, particularly toxic in the process of wilting: brick red mucous membranes, panting, shock.
Supports specialized bee: Andrena (Derandrena) uvulariae.
Symptoms may include: nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Symptoms: Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea
THIS PLANT CAUSES ONLY LOW TOXICITY IF EATEN. Poisonous through ingestion. All parts are poisonous. Symptoms: Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
TOXIC ONLY IF LARGE QUANTITIES EATEN. Poisonous through ingestion. (Poisonous parts: All parts, seeds). Symptoms may include: Vomiting, diarrhea, difficulty of seeing, fainting, and coma.
The Winterberry is a host plant for Henry's Elfin butterfly and attracts other pollinators.  Its fruits are eaten by over 48 species of birds, including cedar waxwings, and small mammals.  Members of the genus Ilex support the following specialized bee: Colletes banksi. The foliage is food source for rabbits and deer.
Thiamine deficiency: weakness, weight loss, staggers, tremors, death

Toxalbumins: phasin, robin and robitin (bark, leaves and seeds)
Two types of medium green leaves: entire, lance-shaped leaves in a basal rosette and stem leaves divided into 3 to 5 deep, narrow lobes.
Two types of simple alternate leaves: basal are oblong to elliptic deeply pinnately lobed and narrow at the base with 7-11 lobes, toothe margins, 4 to 10 inches long.  Sparse stiff stright hairs on upper surface while the lowers is smooth.  Young leaves have a mottled pattern of silver.  Stem leaves ovate to almost circular, palmate to with 5 to 9 shallow lobes that taper from a broad base,  2 to 12 inches long.


Young shoots; only collect plants from areas you know have NOT been treated with pesticides. Gather the young shoots in July or early August. Safe food procedures: soak young shoots in warm water to remove dirt and debris. Do not use dish detergent or any type of sanitizer. These products can leave a residue. The shoots have an unpleasant odor in its raw state but this disappears after cooking. Boil in salted water for five minutes, pour off this first water and add fresh boiling and salted water. Boil for another eight minutes. Serve as a vegetable.
